So it's time now to talk about detection.
So how can we know that we
are in the background or
that we are back from the background?
So, the real situation on most browsers,
it's actually complex, okay?
So, this is actually the diagram
from Chromium browser's, okay?
So this is the official
diagram from Chrome.
So you can see there are many, we
are not going through the whole diagram,
we are going to simplify it for
whatever matters to us.
So, but there is an active state.
That's actually when your web
app is in the foreground,
a passive state,
a hidden state of frozen state.
And then some kind of a state, but
it's actually the final
state called us discard.
So let's try to simplify this.
And by the way, every yellow rectangle
that you see there, it's an event.
So for example, the whole window also has
events like the old focus and blue events.
But to actually make a more cross platform
solution, let's see a simpler life cycle.
So you load a PWA a website, okay?
You open that website,
that's the first step.
Then you go the background.
In that case there is an event call
visibility change that's actually
the event that we will use no matter
how the website is not visible anymore.
Or why visibility change will be fire,
okay?
So that's like the simplest
way to do this.
So the app while in
the background may be suspended.
Again after 5 minutes in Chrome,
it gets suspended.
On iOS, it gets suspended
after three seconds, okay?
So on Chromium-based browsers
unfortunately, we have an event for
that, but not on Safari.
So it's not going to work on iOS, okay?
After three seconds.
It's called freeze.
Freeze will be executed
before the browser or
the iOS it's going to actually
freeze the whole context, okay?
So, we can do something there.
The problem is that it's Chromium based.
All right, so the user may go back to
the app while the app is still in memory.
So it's defreezing the app.
So it was still in memory, but
now it has execution rights again.
In that case, resume is going to be
executed and then also visibility change.
Visibility change is executed from
visible to invisible and vice versa.
It's the same event, okay?
And of course there is an argument
there and we will know if we are coming
from the background or
we're going to the background, okay?
So the problem is that while the app
is suspended, while the app is
in the background, there may be another
situation that the app is scattered.
For example, I'm recording a video.
So that takes a lot of
memory from your phone.
So it says okay that website, that PWA
we're going to discard that app, okay?
So in that case what happens
when the user goes back
to the app, it starts from scratch, okay?
On Chromium based browsers
there is a new Boolean property
in the document properties was discarded.
That gives you a true, when actually the
user is going back from a discarded app.
It's false, if the user is
opening the app from a scratch,
which is creating a new
navigation from a scratch, okay?
But that's Chromium only.
So to summarize this from our web app, so
if we are going from our web app
to another app, web app or not.
This is what typically happens.
On desktop, we are still running but
we are not the active one.
We are not being paused.
So the PWA is still in memory and
it's going to execute
visibility change and blur.
You can see that visibility change
is kind of on every situation and
it's also multi-platform, okay?
So it works on every OS that we
have in the market this day.
On mobile, when we are in our web app and
we are going somewhere else,
it goes through a paused state.
And it's also executing visibility change.
And later in the timeline,
it may execute phrase.
At any time from polls,
it can be discarded.
There is no event for that.
So meaning that like your last minute,
your last dinner, okay?
Before a possible this card,
it's actually freeze or visibility change.
So if we wanna be multiplatform,
it's going to be visibility change.
So if you wanna save whatever
the user is doing in our web app,
just in case our web app is
discarded by the OS, or by the user.
We have to do that in or
within visibility to change.
So the question is that if there is
a data come in as an argument in
visibility change to know which
kind of change is happening.
Or why the visibility change is happening.
So you will know only if you are going to
the background or from the background,
but you don't have enough
details to know what's going on.
In fact, let me tell you something.
There is another situation that
will trigger visibility change.
When you're unloading the website.
I mean, the user is clicking on
a link that goes somewhere else.
And loading that website will
also trigger visibility change,
because your website won't
be visible anymore, okay?
So yeah, it's tricky if you want
to get really deep about why
your web app bits is getting
out of the active window.
It's not so simple to know why.
To be honest, on many situations,
maybe you shouldn't care about why.
It's just, yeah.
The web app it's gone.
So let's save the data.
Or let's stop the timers.
Let's stop the socket, okay?
But yeah, there are some situations
where you might want to keep that.
So it's tricky.
So it's not so simple, okay?
Mostly if you want a multi
platform solution, yeah.
>> One more clarification.
>> Yep.
>> Is it fair to say that for
the frozen state or
the suspended state, execution is paused.
And the RAM allocated to your web
application is maybe it's in RAM or
maybe it's swapped out and
can be restored.
Its whole state is restored and
discarded just means it's destroyed.
And your state is lost and
all your RAM is deallocated.
>> Yeah, that's correct.
So actually,
when you are in the background,
what will happen is that on mobile,
we are talking about mobile right now.
If it's paused, okay, you know it's
still in the RAM so it is in memory.
So your context is still there, but
you will know for how much time.
And you don't know if it's coming back or
not.
So that's why in the moment that we
are going to the background if that's
the best place to say okay just in
case we are going to save the data.
So on Chromium based browsers,
you can keep visibility change and
do this on the free event.
Well, you know for sure that
you're going to the background and
you're going to be hibernating, okay?
But on visibility change
the parameter that on Firefox,
it's also being executed when you
are putting another window on top of it.
So yeah, maybe you're saving data and
in that situation wasn't
actually necessary, okay?
But if you want a multiplatform solution,
you want only one code visibility
change if your friend.
Yeah, then you can try to think your
own algorithm to try to understand
what's going on, but at some point I
think it's not worth the effort, okay?
So this is again,
we are in our web app, and
the user is getting out of the web
app in any of the situations.
Whenever when we are going back, okay?
So when we're going back from
the other web app to our web app,
or to other the other app that
you can be the home screen.
It can be Microsoft Word, wherever, okay?
And we're going back to our app.
On desktop it's actually pretty simple,
so it just makes visible the app, and
on most situations just
visibility change will be fire.
And also focus after that.
On mobile, and also on some rare
desktop situation, such as some.
Such as brave that can
also discard tabs or
some rare situation let's say for
now on desktop.
But a mobile is always
the normal situation.
We are actually like
resuming a suspended state.
So we are going from the state
to be running again.
Visibility change will be fire and
on Chromium resume will be fire, okay?
What happens if the app was discarded?
In that case,
a new load event will be fired.
Again, remember,
the user sees a screenshot that
it feels like the app was there.
The web was there, but
it's actually not there anymore.
So, probably you have
already felt that as a user.
That sometimes you go back to an app and
the app is still there.
Sometimes you go back to an app and
the app restarts.
Well, that's when That app was
discarded by the OS, okay?
And we have a boolean property in
the document on Chromium-based
browsers to know after the load or
why the load is happening.
If this is a new load,
this is a new page navigation,
or this is actually the user
coming back to an app.
So the user is expecting the app
to be on the previous state, yep
>> When does the Boolean go to false so,
if document was discarded equals true
does it ever go back to false on its own
in the native API.
>> On the same load process or?
>> So when the load process is done,
does it go to false or like?
>> No, because that patient navigation.
It's actually until you make a new
patient navigation, it's going.
It's going to become true.
So, yeah, that Boolean property
won't change in the same context.
So it starts with true or with false and
it will stay there, okay?
Now we will actually write that code.
So, because there are so
many possibilities for
background and there are many APIs and
ways like focus and resume.
If you want to detect multi-platform code,
page visibility is your friend.
Page visibility is
the visibility change event.